Trajectory Converters
=====================

Below is the list of converters present in MDANSE. These converters allow for the
outputs of a variety of MD simulation software to be able to be used in
MDANSE by converting the various file formats to the HDF format. These trajectory
converters convert positions and other vital
information such as the unit cell parameters. Additionally when available the trajectory
converters also converter information such as velocities and forces.
This section explains why they are used.

To utilize the trajectory converters effectively, please refer to the
comprehensive technical reference documentation provided with MDANSE.
This documentation covers topics such as input file formats, converter
options, and the specific capabilities of each converter.

CASTEP Converter
-----------------

The CASTEP Converter streamlines the conversion of CASTEP simulation
trajectory data into HDF format, preserving particle velocities, and aiding
materials scientists in understanding material properties at the atomic and
molecular level.

CHARMM Converter
-----------------

The CHARMM Converter efficiently converts CHARMM simulation data into HDF
format, maintaining vital particle velocity information, and supporting
molecular modeling experts in biochemistry, biophysics, and computational
biology research.

CP2K Converter
---------------

The CP2K Converter is tailored for CP2K simulation users, allowing seamless
conversion of trajectory data into HDF format with retained particle velocities,
simplifying data handling for researchers in computational chemistry, condensed
matter physics, and materials science.

DFTB Converter
---------------

The DFTB Converter swiftly transforms Density Functional Tight Binding (DFTB)
trajectory data into HDF format, preserving particle velocities for streamlined
analysis and visualization, benefiting users in materials science, nanotechnology,
and computational chemistry research.


Discover Converter (Materials Studio - Discover Module)
-------------------------------------------------------

This converter is designed to convert trajectory data generated by the
Materials Studio Discover module to HDF format. It retains the velocities of
particles in the trajectory. It is useful for scientists and researchers who
perform simulations using the Discover module and need to analyze or visualize
the trajectory data.

DL_POLY Converter
-----------------

The DL_POLY Converter is capable of converting DL_POLY trajectory data to HDF
format. It not only includes positions but also velocities and forces of
particles in the output HDF file. Researchers who utilize DL_POLY for molecular
dynamics simulations can benefit from this converter to analyze their simulation
results.

DMol Converter (Materials Studio - DMol Module)
-----------------------------------------------

This converter specializes in converting trajectory data generated by the
Materials Studio DMol module to HDF format. While it doesn't include
velocities, it helps researchers who perform electronic structure calculations
with DMol to store and analyze their trajectory data.

Forcite Converter (Materials Studio - Forcite Module)
-----------------------------------------------------

The Forcite Converter is designed to convert trajectory data from the Materials
Studio Forcite module to HDF format. It can include both velocities and forces
in the output HDF file, making it valuable for researchers working on Materials
Studio Forcite simulations.

Generic Converter
-----------------

The Generic Converter is a versatile tool for converting trajectory data stored
in ASCII format to HDF format. It supports both velocities and forces and is
useful when working with simulation software that may not have dedicated
converters available.

Gromacs Converter
-----------------

This converter is tailored for Gromacs users. It converts Gromacs trajectory data
to HDF format, including positions, velocities, and forces. It is useful for
researchers conducting molecular dynamics simulations using Gromacs.

LAMMPS Converter
----------------

The LAMMPS Converter is designed for users of the LAMMPS molecular dynamics
software. It converts LAMMPS trajectory data to HDF format, including positions,
velocities, and forces. It is valuable for researchers conducting simulations
with LAMMPS.

NAMD Converter
--------------

The NAMD Converter is intended for users of the NAMD molecular dynamics software.
It converts NAMD trajectory data to HDF format, including positions, velocities,
and forces. Researchers conducting simulations with NAMD can use this converter
for data analysis.

PDB Converter
-------------

The PDB Converter is a general-purpose tool that converts standalone PDB files
to HDF format. It does not include velocities but is useful for researchers who
have PDB files and want to store or analyze their trajectory data in HDF format.

VASP Converter
--------------

Researchers using the VASP ab-initio simulation package can utilize this
converter to convert VASP trajectory data to HDF format. It is valuable for
those working with VASP simulations in versions 5 and higher.

XPLOR Converter
---------------

The XPLOR Converter is designed for users of the X-PLOR software. It converts
X-PLOR trajectory data to HDF format, including positions, velocities, and
forces. It is useful for researchers conducting molecular dynamics simulations
using X-PLOR.
